docs: adds documentation and initial blog post (#115)
CBIIT/ccdi-federation-api: docs/blog/08-21-2024-introducing-the-federation-api.md

           diagnosis !== undefined &&
           diagnosis.toLowerCase().includes("osteosarcoma");
  });
});

const neuroblastomas = computed(() => {
  return samples.value.filter((s) => {
    let diagnosis = s.metadata?.diagnosis?.value || null;

    return diagnosis !== null &&
           diagnosis !== undefined &&
           diagnosis.toLowerCase().includes("neuroblastoma");
  });
})

watch([osteosarcomas, neuroblastomas], ([osteosarcomas, neuroblastomas], _) => {
  let osteoAges = osteosarcomas.map((d) => d.metadata?.age_at_diagnosis?.value || null);
  let thresholds = d3.ticks(...d3.nice(...d3.extent(osteoAges), 10), 40)
})
</script>

<ClientOnly>
<div class="text-4xl font-extrabold">Introducing the CCDI Federation API</div>
<div class="text-lg mt-1 text-slate-500">The CCDI Federation Developers</div>
<div class="text-slate-400 italic">September 25, 2024</div>

Today, we're announcing the launch of the Childhood Cancer Data Initiative
(CCDI) Federation API 🎉! Foundationally, we've created this API to facilitate
real-time discovery of research data being released across the pediatric cancer
ecosystem. Our hope is that this API will enable pediatric cancer researchers

> around the world to quickly identify data that is relevant to their research and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
around the world to quickly identify data that are relevant to their research and
```

Author: There were a couple of suggestions regarding this; I went with what is suggested [here](https://www.thesaurus.com/e/grammar/data-is-or-data-are/) to make it singular:

> In general usage, data is treated as both a singular and a plural word. When data is used as a [mass noun](https://www.dictionary.com/browse/mass-noun?adobe_mc=MCMID%3D51888964765408706474184288583947612217%7CMCORGID%3DAA9D3B6A630E2C2A0A495C40%2540AdobeOrg%7CTS%3D1727205591) (a noun that can’t be counted, like sand) to mean “information,” it typically uses a singular verb.

entities within the specification.

![An overview of the architecture of the primary
entities.](./08-21-2024-introducing-the-federation-api/architecture-overview.png)

The complete list of API endpoints provided are listed in [the
specification][spec]. That said, accessing the API is designed to be intuitive.
For example, you can access the `/info` endpoint to learn about the source
server, including things like the server's name, the version of the
specification it implements, and when data was last updated within the server.

<ApiCallBlock
  description="Query information about a source server within the federation."
  method="GET"
  path="/info"
/>

#### Subjects

Each **Subject** represents a persistent, top-level entity under which data in
the API is organized. Generally speaking, subjects are individuals from which
data was collected (i.e., participants). That said, the term "subject" was
specifically chosen to encapsulate other types of entities, such as
patient-derived xenografts, cell lines, and organoids.

::: tip NOTE
Subjects have a <a target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"
href="/specification.html#model/modelssubjectkind">`models.subject.Kind`</a>

> that allows you to determine the exact kind of subject.

Reviewer: "the exact kind of subject" is incomplete - needs to refer back to something.

```suggestion
that allows you to determine the exact kind of each subject.
```
```suggestion
that allows you to determine the exact kind of subject it is.
```

the number of files for each type of data shared through the API.

<GraphPlaceholder id="fileByType" />

### Gateways and Links

The primary goal of the API specification is to enable streamlined discovery of
research data shared by federation members and provide relevant metadata.
Typically, this is done through the `File` entities discussed above, but the
question of how these files may be accessed by end users still remains.

The requirements for accessing data within the ecosystem fall into three broad
categories:

- **Open access**, which means that the files can be downloaded immediately
  without authentication or authorization.
- **Registered access**, which means that authentication (but not authorization)
  is required to access the files (e.g., you have to sign up for an account, but
  you don't need any special permissions beyond that).
- **Controlled access** data, which means that data access must be explicitly
  granted through some data request process.

Each site has different file sharing procedures and generally will have
different requirements for authentication and authorization.

To capture and describe this information, the API specification introduces the

> concept of a `Gateway`: a novel mechanism for defining the authentication and

Reviewer: "mechanism" Yes! that's a much better word for it 🌟

ecosystem. Our goal is to improve the user experience of accessing data shared
by various federation members and to make it easier to build automated data
access pipelines that seamlessly download the latest pediatric cancer research
data as it becomes available. Several examples of how to assign and interpret
these `Gateway`s/`Link`s are available [in the corresponding documentation]
(**Clay to add link here**).

### Limitations

Being the first version of the API specification, there are several important
notes to understand when leveraging the API regarding its limitations. We expect
the list of notes to grow as we receive feedback and questions on this blog
post.

#### Interpretation of Samples

As discussed in the description of `Sample`s above, this entity covers
essentially everything between a `Subject` and a `File`. This means that you
must take great care when interpreting the results from any `/sample` endpoints.
For example,

- When a single case has been profiled by whole-genome, whole-exome, and
  RNA-Seq, the server is expected to return three sample entries—not one.
  Importantly though, the identifier for the sample should be made unique

>   between the three entries when also considering the experiment in the

Reviewer: My comment from the previous draft remains: The sample identifier element doesn't have any `experiment` field so I don't understand what this refers to.
Do you mean something to the effect of "these three experiments on the same case will each be assigned a separate sample identifier"?  That's how Treehouse would do it, though the experiment type wouldn't be included in the identifier -- you'd need to use the `library_strategy` metadata to understand what was different about each sample.

Author: Ah right—apologies, I did _think_ of response here, but I neglected to update it. I'll change to remove this reference and use `library_strategy`.

  sample should be made unique between the two entries when also considering the
  namespace in the identifier (different projects should have different
  namespaces).

This also means that simply counting the number of _cases_ of a particular
diagnosis is not as simple as using the `GET /sample/by/diagnosis/count`
endpoint. When counting samples within a particular source server, you should
consider deduplicating samples across namespaces (if you don't want the same
biological entity sequenced across multiple projects to count multiple times)
and/or deduplicating by experiment (if you don't want multiple experiments being
performed against the same biological entity to be counted multiple times). Even
in doing so, a comprehensive deduplication of cases across the ecosystem is not
currently possible for a variety of other reasons, including the fact that no
facility exists to deduplicate samples across source servers.

### Summary

With these examples laid out in this blog post, we hope we've convinced you that
a real-time, federated data ecosystem can dramatically improve data discovery
time (and, subsequentially, time to knowledge generation). To reiterate, all of

> the data data displayed in this blog post was collected from the source servers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the data displayed in this blog post were collected from the source servers
```

Author: See comment about the singular reference to data above.

and when you loaded the page. As we continue to expand the concepts that the API
covers, we hope to greatly improve the experience of discovering data within the
pediatric cancer community.

> To follow along with progress, please star and follow the project [on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To stay updated on our progress, please star and follow the project [on
```
Avoid "follow" twice in the same sentence. (credit for this suggestion to @GeoffLyle )

Author: Thank you for this catch! I just missed copying it over because it was at the very end.
